FLIP: Cadence borrowContract - Allow Dynamic Import (#1071)
onflow/flow: flips/20220725-cadence-borrowContract.md

# borrowContract function for PublicAccount

| Status        | Proposed    												  |
:-------------- |:------------------------------------------------------------|

> | **FLIP #**    | [NNN](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/NNN)  	 		  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **FLIP #**    | [1071](https://github.com/onflow/flow/pull/1071)  	 		  |
```

| **Author(s)** | Deniz Mert Edincik (deniz@edincik.com)  					  |
|				| Austin Kline (austin@flowty.io)  							  | 
| **Sponsor**   | 														      |
| **Updated**   | 2022-07-25                                    			  |

## Objective

> This proposed change will allow dynamic import of contracts from an address, by
> using a well known `borrow` dynamic.

Reviewer: The objective should focus on the goal, not the *how*. Move the second part to the "Design Proposal" section

```suggestion
This proposal will allow Cadence programs to import contracts dynamically from an address.
```

## Motivation

There is a popular request, especially from people coming from EVM space, to
have a way to import contracts from an address by name ( dynamic import
functionality )

Cadence lacks with dynamic imports, which leads to mass imports in some 
contracts ( e.g. alchemy, find ) which also causes a lot of contracts to fail, 
if one of the important contracts cease to exist. 

## User Benefit

> - It makes it possible to use patterns that are common to Solidity developers 

Author: I gave one as a code example ( creating collection example )  but I will try to add some more examples to the FLIP.

> - It makes it possible to use patterns that are common to Solidity developers 

Reviewer: A good use-case could maybe be to create an empty FT vault?

in Flow. 

> - It allows importing and using Contracts with name collision https://github.com
> /onflow/cadence/issues/1171

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It allows importing and using contracts with name collision. See https://github.com/onflow/cadence/issues/1171
```

- It will prevent single contract breaking the ecosystem

## Design Proposal

We suggest to add an new method to `PublicAccount` called `borrowContract`.

```cadence 

> fun borrowContract<T: &Any>(name: String): T?

Reviewer: This seems related to the contracts functionality of an account, which is already grouped into ``PublicAccount.Contracts`. Also, this function should also be available for `AuthAccount`s, i.e. be added to `AuthAccount.Contracts`. Maybe also rename the function to just `borrow`, as the other functions don't contain the noun either (e.g. `get`, `add`, etc.)

Author: @turbolent how about putting `borrow<&T>(): &T` method to DeployedContract ? I think I can make T somehow inferred automatically right?

```

Exmaple usage will be:

```cadence 

> if let contract = getAccount(0x1).borrowContract<&AnyResource{NonFungibleToken}>("ExampleNFT") {

Reviewer 2: One of my concerns with this approach is that, it allows having multiple variables pointing to the same contract. And also makes contracts behave like other cadence 'values'.

I think this is something that has been avoided by the design of cadence: https://docs.onflow.org/cadence/language/contracts/
> Contracts are types. They are similar to composite types, but are stored differently than structs or resources and cannot be used as values, copied, or moved like resources or structs

Author: Yeah actually, I choose borrow exactly for this reason. ( multiple variables pointing to the same contract ) 

By using reference to the contract, we avoid copy and move technically.

Reviewer: That's a good idea. Could you please add this reasoning to the proposal itself?

	let emptyCollection <- contract.createEmptyCollection()
}
```

> Another alternative is to add `borrow` method to `DeployedContract`:

Reviewer 3: The FLIP should propose one of these two and put the other in the "Alternatives" section. As it is now I am not sure which of the two specifically you are proposing.

```cadence 
fun borrow<T: &Any>(): T?
```

Exmaple usage will be:

```cadence 

> if let contract = getAccount(0x1).contracts.get("ExampleNFT").borrow<&AnyResource{NonFungibleToken}>() {

Reviewer: Downside of this is that the whole contract information is fetched (e.g. code), then thrown away (only the name is used)

Author: ah I just see this comment after replying to the other one. I will try to implement borrow(contractName: String)

Reviewer: Maybe move this alternative `borrow` function into a "Alternatives Considered" section, and propose just one API, the `borrowContract` function.

	let emptyCollection <- contract.createEmptyCollection()
}
```

### Compatibility

This should be backwards compatible. 

### User Impact

This will change the way users write their smart contracts. This can cause some issues with reading contract code due to the nature of dynamic imports. But eventually we don't see any security impact. 

> 

Reviewer 2: There was another approach suggested and some concerns were discussed in https://github.com/onflow/cadence/issues/550. Could those be applicable to this approach as well?

Also, can that be considered as an alternative approach?

Author: I think this is currently possible. ( package manager approach ) 

Main problem there is PackageManagerContract.
- It has to import a lot of other contracts and will hit interaction limit. 
- Even single one of the imports vanish, all contract will fail

Reviewer: It seems like the two features, borrowing a contract as proposed in this proposal, and dynamically resolving an import (onflow/cadence#550), are two related features, but not alternatives. It is maybe worth mentioning the related feature

# borrowContract function for PublicAccount

> | Status        | Proposed    												  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Status        | Approved    												  |
```

## Motivation

There is a popular request, especially from people coming from EVM space, to have a way to import contracts from an address by name ( dynamic import functionality )

Cadence lacks dynamic imports, which leads to mass imports in some contracts ( e.g., alchemy, find ) which also causes many contracts to fail if one of the crucial contracts ceases to exist. 

## User Benefit

- It makes it possible to use patterns common to Solidity developers in Flow. ( Such as creating an empty `Vault` or empty `Collection` for the FT/NFT type without prior knowledge of the contract except if it implements the relevant standard.
- It allows importing and using contracts with a name collision. See https://github.com/onflow/cadence/issues/1171
- It will prevent a single contract from breaking the ecosystem

## Design Proposal

We suggest adding a new method `borrow` to  both `AuthAccount.Contracts` and `PublicAccount.Contracts`.

Borrowing a Contract will return a reference to the contract, avoiding move/copy problems. 

Implemented a proof of concept in https://github.com/onflow/cadence/pull/1934

```cadence 
fun borrow<T: &Any>(name: String): &T?
```

```cadence 

> if let contract = getAccount(0x1).contracts.borrow("ExampleFT") {

Reviewer: The function call requires a type argument for the type parameter `T`:

```suggestion
if let contract = getAccount(0x1).contracts.borrow<&FungibleToken>("ExampleFT") {
```

	let emptyVault <- contract.createEmptyVault()
}
```

## Alternative 

Adding a method named `borrowContract` to both `PublicAccount` and `AuthAccount`.

```cadence 
fun borrowContract<T: &Any>(name: String): &T?
```

Example usage will be:

```cadence 
if let contract = getAccount(0x1).borrowContract<&FungibleToken>("ExampleFT") {
	let emptyVault <- contract.createEmptyVault()
}
```

## Compatibility

This change should be backward compatible. 

## User Impact

The proposed change can affect how users write their smart contracts, which can cause some minor issues with reading contract code due to the nature of dynamic imports. But eventually, we don't see any negative security impact. 

## Prior Art & Related Features 

> - Dynamically resolving import addresses [https://github.com/onflow/cadence/issues/550] 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Dynamically resolving import addresses https://github.com/onflow/cadence/issues/550
```
